Monthly report for July 2023 (#1004)
input-output-hk/hydra: docs/monthly/2023-07-monthly.md

---
title: July 2023
slug: 2023-07
authors: [ch1bo, abailly, v0d1ch]
tags: [monthly]
---

This report summarizes the work on Hydra since June 2023. It serves as
preparation for the monthly review meeting (see [slides][slides] and
[recording][recording]), where the team updates project stakeholders on recent
developments to gather their feedback on proposed plans.

### Starmap update

> Every couple months, we reflect on the the themes we identified for 2023 (as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every couple of months, the team reflects on the the themes identified for 2023 (as
```

> presented in [January](/monthly/2023-01#themes-for-2023)), and create a very high

Reviewer: ```suggestion
presented in [January](/monthly/2023-01#themes-for-2023)), and creates a very high
```

> level list of possible deliverables which could bring us closer to our goals,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
level list of possible deliverables,
```

> e.g. using [impact maps](./img/2022-11-impact.png). This time we have come up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
eg using [impact maps](./img/2022-11-impact.png). This time the team has come up
```

with the following items:

![](./img/2023-07-starmap.png)

- Sustainable open-source :green_heart:

  - **Hydra master-class workshop**: A concrete session we aim to conduct in an
    upcoming event or online as a fallback. This will also be a motivation to

>     update our already existing tutorials and improve the first start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    update our existing tutorials and improve the first start
```

    experience.

>   - **Engage & support developer community on catalyst proposals**: There are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Engage and support developer community on catalyst proposals**: There are
```

    around 30 proposals mentioning Hydra in the current catalyst funding round
    and we want to review, comment, try to align and maybe even promote some

>     proposals. The goal here is to provide a platform to the many new ideas out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    proposals. The goal here is to provide a platform for the many new ideas out
```

>     there, while avoiding fragmentation and maximum re-use of work across the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    there, while avoiding fragmentation and maximizing reuse of work.
```

>     space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    
```

  - **Further open up github repositories**: we want to provide a welcoming

>     experience to non-IOG contributors and provide an easy to navigate space of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    experience to non-IOG contributors and provide an easy-to-navigate group of
```

    repositories relating to Hydra.

- Mainnet mature application :purple_heart:

  - **Make Hydra trivial to use**: Improving user and developer experience,
    enabling a quick and frictionless setup of Hydra, likely also involving

>     Mithril to get started. Goal is to be able to open a distributed hydra head

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Mithril to get started. The goal is to be able to open a distributed hydra head
```

>     with two nodes on a testnet within a few minutes; end-to-end!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    with two nodes on a testnet within a few minutes end to end.
```

>   - **Build a basic head explorer**: In the past we experimented with an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Build a basic head explorer**: The team experimented with an
```

Author: We use the "we" form in this list already in multiple places

>     explorer already, but this time we want to set it up persistently. Not only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    explorer already, but this time we want to set it up for the long term. Not only
```

    to measure adoption of Hydra, but primarily as a tool for app developers and
    eventually a visualization for end users to start answering questions like
    "who is running this head?"

- Drive adoption :blue_heart:

>   - **Deliver a first version of HydraNow to mainnet**: Although ambitious, we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Deliver a first version of HydraNow to mainnet**: 
```

>     think it's important that the very promising use case of payments using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It's important that the very promising use case of payments using
```

>     Hydra is made available to first users on mainnet. Concretely, this would be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Hydra is made available to first users on mainnet. As a concrete example, this would be
```

    the mobile application "HydraNow" which uses a `hydra-pay` service to enable
    peer-to-peer payment channels.

  - **Enable uni-directional payment channels**: This will expand the
    capabilities of any payment channel created using Hydra to allow deposits &
    withdrawals while keeping the Head open.

> You will find work packages related to these items pop up on our technical

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Work packages related to these items pop up on the technical
```

roadmap (especially [this view](https://github.com/orgs/input-output-hk/projects/21/views/26)) and as things we do in the community.

## Roadmap

This month the team released version 0.11.0 which shifts the way Hydra clients

> need to interact with the hydra-node when commiting funds. The project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
need to interact with the hydra-node when committing funds. The project
```

[roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/input-output-hk/projects/21) was also updated
to reflect latest developments and ideas from the starmap:

![The roadmap without idea items](./img/2023-07-roadmap-ex-ideas.png) <small><center>The roadmap without idea items</center></small>

#### Release 0.11.0

- Completes the L2 ledger isomorphism with timed transaction support

- Adds commit from external wallets API, which allows to

  - Commit multiple UTxO
  - Commit from scripts

>   - Commit directly from any key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Commit directly from any key.
```

- Deprecated: Internal commits via the websocket API

- [Full release notes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/releases/tag/0.11.0) and a list of [delivered features](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/milestone/11?closed=1)

#### Notable updates

- Two new items \__elevated_ from user ideas and both improving the API capabilities:

  - [Ability to read protocol parameters via API
    #735](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/735)
  - [Submit L1 transactions through hydra-node #966](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/966)

- [Removing commit from internal wallet #954](Submit L1 transactions through
  hydra-node#954) is a consequence of deprecating this functionality in the
  previous 0.11.0 release. This will make the code base and documentation
  cleaner as there will be only one way to commit funds to a head.

> - First new item derived from the starmap is to [Update tutorial and include

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The first new item derived from the starmap is to [Update tutorial and include
```

  Mithril #997](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/997). The

>   tutorial is already a bit outdated, we want to slim it down and incorporate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  tutorial is already a bit outdated, this will slim it down and incorporate
```

  Mithril to get the fastest (secure) bootstrap possible of a `hydra-node`.

> - As we are focusing on the very concrete use case of payments for mainnet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As a result of focusing on the very concrete use case of payments for mainnet
```

>   deployment (and hence 1.0.0 release), multiple items need to (and can!) get

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  deployment (and hence 1.0.0 release), multiple items need to (and can) get
```

  reprioritized to match the requirements of this use case.

![The latest roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2023-07-roadmap.png) <small><center>The latest roadmap with features and ideas</center></small>

## Development

[Issues and pull requests closed since last
report](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2023-06-22..2023-07-28)

This month, the team worked on the following:

#### Authenticate network messages [#727](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/727)

The Hydra Head protocol paper states:

> Each party then establishes pairwise authenticated channels to all other parties.

[Hydra: Fast Isomorphic State Channels, p.14](https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/299.pdf)

Guaranteeing the authenticity and integrity of the messages received from one's
peers is critical to the security of the Head protocol. While this is something

> that we initially thought to defer to the transport layer, eg. leaving it to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that we initially thought to defer to the transport layer, eg leaving it to
```

Hydra node operators to use TLS or other kind of encrypted channels to

> communicate with their peers, we realised this introduced an additional unneeded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
communicate with their peers, this introduced an additional unneeded
```

preventing some forms of _Denial of Service_ attacks or wrongly configured nodes
that would lead to a _stalled head_.

#### ReqSn only sends Transaction IDs [#728](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/728)

This is another feature which better aligns the current implementation with the
original paper, by requesting snapshots using only the transaction identifiers
and not the full transaction.

The motivation to implement this feature came from different directions:

- Improve the performance of the protocol by reducing the bandwidth usage,
- Make it possible to have "atomic" transaction sets submitted
  ([#900](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/900)),
- Prevent "front-running" from the current leader which, in the previous
  implementation, could inject arbitrary (but valid) transactions that peers had
  never seen before into a snapshot.

`ReqSn`'s snapshots now contains only the list of transaction ids and each
hydra-node validates the snapshot by resolving those ideas against the set of
transactions they have seen (through `ReqTx`). A consequence is that this
introduces the possibility of space leak in the event a submitted valid

> transaction never gets included in a snapshot, but we thought this should not be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transaction never gets included in a snapshot, but this should not be
```

a problem in practice.

Note the
[specification](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/core-concepts/specification)
has been updated to reflect this change.

#### Github security advisories

> We discovered a bug in the multisignature verification which could compromise

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There was a bug in the multisignature verification which could compromise
```

off-chain security of a Hydra Head. Although the fix was quite simple, we

> decided to use a new Github feature to create the first [Github Security

Reviewer: ```suggestion
decided to use a new GitHub feature to create the first [GitHub Security
```

Advisory](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/security/advisories/GHSA-c8qp-cv4h-vcc4)
for Hydra.

> The process creates a separate github repository where potential security issues

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process creates a separate GitHub repository where potential security issues
```

could be discussed in privacy (between the reporter and the maintainers) since
potential attackers should not be aware of any issues until they are fixed. The
team scored this issue using CVSS (The Common Vulnerability Scoring System), the
score was moderate (5.5), and they didn't request a CVE (Common Vulnerabilities
and Exposures) for this (yet).

> The process overall works nice but Hydra CI is not checking the builds in these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process overall works well, but Hydra CI is not checking the builds in these
```

private, one-off forks so there is a risk of merging code that doesn't compile.

#### Moving to GHC 9.2.7 [#841](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/841)

> GHC 9.2 series have been around for more than a year and the whole cardano ecosystem is gradually moving to use this new compiler version. Moreover, GHC 8.10.7 does not work reliably on aarch64 architectures, eg. Mac M1/M2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GHC 9.2 series have been around for more than a year and the whole Cardano ecosystem is gradually moving to use this new compiler version. Moreover, GHC 8.10.7 does not work reliably on aarch64 architectures, eg Mac M1/M2.
```

| -------- | ------------- | -------------- | ----- |
| νInitial | 4289          | 4621           | - 7%  |
| νCommit  | 2124          | 2422           | - 12% |
| νHead    | 9185          | 8954           | + 3%  |
| μHead    | 4149          | 4458           | -7%   |

## Community

### Hydra master-class

As already mentioned above in our starmap update, we aim to be having an educational session at the upcoming Rare Evo event:

> Whether you are building decentralized applications which need to be fast and scale well, or you are creating infrastructure for other builders on Cardano, we will show you how to use Hydra to make your applications and platforms utilize fast off-chain transaction processing via the Hydra Head protocol.
>
> In this session you will learn what Hydra is all about, how to build scalable applications in a live coding session, get to know the hydra-pay and hydra-auction projects, and be guided through exercises to get your hands on these APIs and early SDKs.

We are currently putting together a detailed outline and will send out
communications on how to register to this exclusive session within the next 1-2

> weeks. Stay tuned!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
weeks. Stay tuned.
```

## Conclusion

The monthly review meeting for May was held on 2023-07-26 via Google Meet with
these [slides][slides] and here is the [recording][recording].

Although we would have prepared an _awesome_ demo for this months review meeting
in which we hack a Hydra Head without the authenticated messages feature,
but unfortunately we had some live demo problems (never forget: record a
backup!). While we might show it next time still, this just further highlights
that we have reason to improve the developer and user experience still.

> Not much questions on our journey to mature the Hydra software stack further to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not many questions on our journey to mature the Hydra software stack further to
```

support various use cases building on it. However, the recently kicked-off

> Fund10 of catalyst sparked a nice discussion of how to handle all this great new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fund10 of catalyst sparked a nice discussion of how to handle all these great new
```

ideas while being conscious of not fragmenting the scaling efforts too much.

> Open protocols mean that new ideas can be incorporated not only to the various

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open protocols mean that new ideas can be incorporated not only in the various
```

> code bases, but also to the specification and standards which ensure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code bases, but also in the specification and standards which ensure
```

interoperability. We discussed means to ensure adherence to standards in a

> light-weight agile way and challenges of educating potential contributors in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
light-weight agile way and the challenges of educating potential contributors in
```
